[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
And we are so lucky
to be alive right now.
Think of all the access that
we have to spiritual teachings
and experiences.
And this is just causing
more and more people
to become more aware,
more awake, more conscious
every single day.
So maybe you're in
the place in your life
when you are done searching.
Maybe you're done looking for
that thing outside yourself
to fulfill you,
and you're really
ready to be truly free
and truly of contribution
because you found
what you're looking
for is right inside of you.
That's what we're
talking about today.
It's called awakening.
And Arjuna Ardagh is here.
He is an awakening coach.
He's the author of eight books.
His latest is "Better Than Sex."
And he also trains
people to become
facilitators of awakening.
I'm so glad you're here.
Thanks for being here today.
>>ARJUNA ARDAGH: It's a great
pleasure to be with you again.
>>LISA: So can we start a
little bit about your journey?
About your journey
into awakening.
Where were you before that?
Were you searching?
Were you found?
Where were you?
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
Well, Lisa, I think just
like for anybody in this way,
it starts with suffering.
That's the initial motivation.
>>LISA: It's the human journey.
>>ARDAGH: Right.
So I was born in
London in the 1950s.
I would say into a
family where there
was an above average
level of suffering.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>ARDAGH: I had kind of
super enhanced suffering
in my family.
>>LISA: OK.
>>ARDAGH: So there was
a lot of mental illness
and suicide and
depression in my family.
So when you're a little kid, you
don't really know about that.
Your family is your
family and then
the outside world is
beyond your family.
But when you get
to be a teenager,
you start to individuate.
And then you can look at
your family in a fresh way
and actually you're able to
evaluate the deck of cards
that you've been dealt.
So it was actually
at that time, when
I got to be 14, for the
first time I realized, wow,
this is not a pretty picture.
>>LISA: This is not normal.
>>ARDAGH: I realized if I
just go along the same route
that my fam-- that
is genetic to me,
I'm going to either commit
suicide or go crazy.
>>LISA: Wow.
Stakes were high.
>>ARDAGH: The stakes were high.
So this was 1971 when I was 14.
So I was-- I started
to look around.
What's available?
What can you do
to heal your mind?
So the obvious thing
was psychotherapy and
psychoanalysis which both my
parents had friends in that.
But as soon as I met
a few psychoanalysts
and psychotherapists,
even at that young age,
I realized they were in worse
trouble than their patients.
>>LISA: That's
interesting as a teenager.
>>ARDAGH: So I looked
around what else was there.
There was the Hare
Krishnas, right,
going down Oxford
Street in 1971.
Hare Krishna.
With their little thing.
And so I thought,
well, they were
talking about
enlightenment and Krishna
and I thought,
great, that sounds
like the mega dose
I'm looking for.
So I went to my
mother and I said,
I've decided I'm going to
become a Hare Krishna, which
I thought was really good news.
She threatened an
immediate overdose
if I did anything like it.
So we did a compromise
and I learned
transcendental
meditation, and that's
what really got me going.
I did that for many, many years.
And that was really
what started it
for me was I realized my psyche
was in such enormous disrepair
that there was no way to fix
it through traditional methods.
I was going to need to actually
transcend it completely.
And that's what I was--
really got interested
when I was a teenager.
>>LISA: Now, that
explains a lot.
That right there, to
transcend the normal,
even-- especially to
transcend the broken.
That is a great
definition of awakening.
Transcendence.
And did you follow different
teachers at the time?
>>ARDAGH: I did.
>>LISA: How long were
you in that process for?
>>ARDAGH: Well, it was 20 years.
20 years.
From 14 to 34.
I was really like
a full time seeker.
And there's a certain lifestyle
that goes along with that.
There's a way you meet people.
You don't say, how
you doing anymore.
You say "namaste."
And you eat certain food
and you've got a yoga mat.
There's a whole
kind of thing goes
with being a-- rather like
being a football enthusiast.
There's a certain
lifestyle goes with it.
Or being a surfer.
So being a spiritual seeker
there's a lifestyle involved.
So I did that very thoroughly.
I lived in India.
Whatever you could do, I did it.
And so wind the clock
forward to when I was 34.
This is 1991.
And I realized, you know, this
was like a hamster in a wheel.
That this seeking for a
state of enlightenment, which
is a concept that everybody
was holding in their mind,
that we've got to
enlightened, you know.
This hamster wheel,
it was actually
not really going anywhere.
It was just continuous movement
of working on yourself.
And that was when I met
an old man in India,
in Uttar Pradesh, who was not
really part of that whole game.
He was very rough.
He was a retired army officer.
His name is H.W.L. Poonja.
He was a retired army officer
who was really quite impatient
and didn't give any
teachings at all.
The first day I met him,
there was about eight people
in his living room
sitting on the floor.
And he was staring into space.
He was looking very kind
of bored and annoyed
by the whole thing.
And so finally I
got to speak to him
and he said, what do you want?
What do you want?
And I was a bit on
the spot because I
thought it was
obvious what I wanted
as part of this whole
spiritual seeking thing.
He said, what do you want?
So I said, well,
I said to him, I
feel like I've been seeking
as long as I can remember.
I said, what is in
the way of finding?
And he looked at me like it
was the most utterly stupid
question anybody had ever
asked him in his life.
He looked at me like, he said,
what's in the way of finding?
Seeking, of course.
And we can sit here in
2014 and laugh about that,
but I tell you, at that time it
completely put me into a spin
because I didn't know
anything else by that point.
My entire life
was about seeking.
And he was telling me that
seeking was the problem.
So I had one more conversation
with him that morning.
And, again, he looked
at me and he just
looked to me very intensely
and said, what do you want?
So I gave him the answer we'd
all been trained to give.
It was what we had been
conditioned to believe.
I want to be enlightened.
I want to be free.
No, I said, I want
to be enlightened.
He said, what's that?
Which I thought was an
interesting question
from a teacher.
What's that?
I said, well, I want to be free.
He said, OK.
You show me the one who is
bound, and I will make it free.
I thought that's a great deal.
I've just got to show him my
ego and he'll set it free.
Fantastic.
So I thought this was deal
of the century, you know.
So I went back to my hotel
room to try and find the ego,
you see?
And this took about a week.
But the more I was looking
for this bound entity,
all I could find was
thoughts, was just
thoughts and thoughts
and thoughts.
And after a while,
the thoughts stopped
actually making any coherence.
They were just random thoughts.
Apple pie, a movie
I saw, Mary Poppins.
Just all this stuff going on.
>>LISA: But you were looking
for the physical manifestation
of the ego?
>>ARDAGH: I don't know
what I was looking for.
What I realized was I had
no idea what's going on at,
you see.
I was lost.
But he had told me I had to
find this thing that was bound
and he would make it free.
So after six days-- today
it takes like 30 seconds,
but I was a difficult case--
so after six days, I woke up.
I wasn't really sleeping, but
I kind of woke up from resting,
you know, a little bit
refreshed after the night.
OK.
There's something
I've got to do.
Oh, you've got to find the ego.
Got to find the ego.
So it was as though
a hand went back
into whatever was there
to find this thing,
and the hand just went on and
on and on and on and on forever.
And there was just space.
Just empty space.
And then in that moment
there was a recognition--
it's always been like that.
Everything else was made up.
There was never a thing called
an ego, it was just a concept
created by--
>>LISA: A concept.
>>ARDAGH: --Freud's
translator, actually,
that got into the popular lingo.
That there's never
been this thing.
There's always been this space.
And it was a very
clear recognition
that the whole
thing was made up.
The whole seeking,
of being bound,
the whole thing was made up.
It was a story that
we get trapped in.
And when you actually wake up
from believing in that story,
there is just space,
which is free,
which is full of love,
which is full of creativity.
And I tell you, I sat on
the bed and involuntarily
my body just laughed for
like 25 minutes straight.
It was like a joke.
Getting a joke.
>>LISA: A joke and the
joke was on you literally.
>>ARDAGH: The joke is
on all of us, yeah.
>>LISA: What did you mean
by Freud's translator?
>>ARDAGH: Well, Freud,
of course, spoke German.
So I think he just
used the word, ich,
which is a German word.
But when it was
translated in the--
and I'm not a
great scholar, so I
might have this
completely wrong.
But what I've heard is that
it was Freud's translator
translating Freud to
English in the 1950s
after the war who
tried to translate
this word for individualization,
and he called it ego.
So there was ego, super ego, id.
So people now
often refer to that
like it's a thing, like you
got to get rid of your ego.
Oh, my ego made me do it.
I've got to get rid
of my ego, to work
on my ego likes it's a thing.
>>LISA: Like it's
a physical thing.
>>ARDAGH: But you can't
find a thing, you see.
>>LISA: Well, though
the ego can show up
in ways that feel
that they're solid.
Like rudeness or gregarity.
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
Exactly.
But rudeness is a function,
you see, it's not a thing.
Now, in the same way,
if I took a flashlight--
if it was dark in here
and I took a flashlight
and went like that,
you'd be tempted
to say there is a circle.
>>LISA: Right.
>>ARDAGH: But there is no
circle, it's just a flashlight
going around.
Right?
So in the same way, yes,
there is egoic behavior,
but that's a movement.
That's a movement in a medium.
And the moment the
movement stops, it's gone.
>>LISA: So behavior
is not solid.
>>ARDAGH: Exactly.
Yeah.
>>LISA: It could create
things like hurt feelings,
but those aren't solid either.
>>ARDAGH: Right.
So in this moment-- in any
moment-- that we actually
wake up and pay
attention to what's real,
all of those things disappear--
the mind, the ego, the past,
the future-- all of it's
gone and there is just this.
>>LISA: OK.
I have to go further with this.
OK.
So take for instance
a bully, and the bully
is bullying someone and they
physically beat up on somebody.
That's a physical manifestation.
>>ARDAGH: It's a behavior.
If you were to do a
surgery on the person we're
calling a bully,
do a surgery, you
wouldn't find any bullyness.
It's just behavior-- a repeated
habitual behavior pattern.
Repeated habitual
behavior patterns
happen when we act
according to conditioning.
But as soon as we
have a moment, just
a taste of what
is actually here,
which is consciousness
experiencing this,
we break those patterns.
We interrupt those patterns.
Now, you-- maybe this
has happened for you.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>ARDAGH: I can remember you
mentioned a bully at school.
I can remember people who, when
I went to school with them,
were really-- were bullies, were
really unpleasant characters.
>>LISA: Of course.
>>ARDAGH: And a few of them
I've met in later life.
And they've become the sweetest,
most caring, most kind, most
philanthropic people.
So then you could ask, well,
where did the bullyness go?
It wasn't surgically removed.
It was just a behavior
pattern changed.
>>LISA: So that space
that you talk about,
that the hand
reached back and it
was infinite the
amount of space.
Did you ever go
back to the teacher
and tell him that you've
found what he's talking about?
>>ARDAGH: Yes.
Yes.
>>LISA: What did he say?
>>ARDAGH: Well,
since you asked I'll
tell you exactly what happened.
I actually-- That
moment of the laughing
happened early in the morning.
So then I had breakfast.
It was about the best
breakfast I've ever had.
Everything tasted fantastic.
The waiter was like an angel.
The world became
incredibly bright
and luminous and
enjoyable simply
because the pattern of endless
thought was interrupted.
And that is all that interferes
from this moment being
paradise.
You see?
The only thing in the
way of this moment being
the best moment ever is this--
>>LISA: Suffering.
>>ARDAGH: --pattern
of automatic thinking.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>ARDAGH: So I went to see him.
And somebody asked a question--
some kind of question
like, why do we,
blah, blah, blah.
And he said to this
person, he said,
just a minute-- he was
very gruff-- just a minute,
he said, just a minute.
I have to finish my account with
this man, and pointed at me.
I have to finish my
account with this man.
So he called me forward.
And he called me forward I guess
to sit here, but I kind of just
kept going and ended
up kind of hugging him.
And I whispered in his ear,
I said the account's closed.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>ARDAGH: And he
knew what I meant.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>ARDAGH: The penny
had dropped, you see.
>>LISA: Of course.
And it didn't ever turn back?
>>ARDAGH: It's not
really like that.
I think that that's-- that's
something we can talk about.
That's like a concept popular
in kind of spiritual mythology.
>>LISA: Please.
Let's talk.
>>ARDAGH: There's this
point of no return.
People call that enlightenment.
I think it's very misleading
to think of it that way.
It's, in the same
way, I mean, supposing
we're talking about
the sky, right?
And let's say you're
living in London
where there's a lot of clouds.
So you've kind of forgotten what
the sky is beyond the clouds.
You're only used to clouds.
And one day the clouds part
and I take you outside and say,
look, what do you see?
And you say, ah, it's blue.
>>LISA: Blue.
>>ARDAGH: Maybe
it's even like one
of those three days
in the year in London
where there's no clouds
at all, and you go, wow,
it's completely blue.
Right?
And then you could tell
a friend about this.
Well, you know, I went-- Arjuna
took me outside and pointed up
and it was blue, you see?
And then they might say,
well, but did it go back?
But it's not like that,
because once you recognize
the blueness of the sky, you
recognize the way things are,
and then it doesn't matter if
clouds come or they don't come.
>>LISA: It can't go back.
>>ARDAGH: You
realize that was not
a temporary change of
condition; you had an insight
into the way things are.
So if you're asking having
seen that the nature
of consciousness
is infinite, did it
ever stop being infinite again?
No.
The nature of consciousness
doesn't cease to be what it is.
But, of course,
you know what it's
like to have a relationship
and raise a child.
I've raised two kids.
And life is difficult sometimes.
Life is challenging.
You go through your stresses.
And, of course, it's just
the human experience.
We go through our
times of being more
caught up the less caught up.
But the realization
that all of this
is happening in the context
of infinite consciousness--
that can't be undone.
It's a recognition of
the way things are.
You know?
>>LISA: It's interesting,
because you mentioned earlier
about suffering and suffering
being the-- Buddhist philosophy
talks about suffering and
that the human being grapples
with the hero's journey
and goes through this phase
of suffering.
Do you think that we need to
have that level of suffering
before we can get to
this level of awakening?
Do you think we
need that contrast?
Is that why we create it?
>>ARDAGH: I think I needed it.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
Certain ones of us do.
>>ARDAGH: I think I needed it.
It's very obvious
to me, looking back,
that the difficult
circumstances of my early life
were absolutely a blessing
and that I wouldn't
be enjoying everything
I have today
and able to give
everything I have today
were it not for that level
of suffering, because I coach
and I train coaches.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>ARDAGH: There is
nothing that anyone
can bring to me that
will phase me now.
However desperate people are
I go, I know what that's like.
And so it became a
blessing, you see.
It became something
that was of service.
>>LISA: So actually
let me talk to you
about the awakening
coaching that you do.
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
>>LISA: So you train people
to become awakening coaches.
>>ARDAGH: Yes.
>>LISA: And--
because how long have
you been coaching
people in awakening?
>>ARDAGH: Oh, I
don't know, 25 years?
>>LISA: 25 years.
So I want to ask you,
how do you train somebody
to do what you do?
>>ARDAGH: Well, that's a
really good question, you see.
And if you don't mind, I'd
like to answer it in a slightly
indirect way because it's a
part of a bigger question.
So I think that the most
eternal longing and quest
that human beings
have is to come home.
All right?
I would say that that's
the first conscious human
being-- if there was
such a thing-- that
was the fir-- that
has always been there.
This longing to come home.
And we have an intuition
for what home is.
So when we're talking
about awakening,
we're talking about a very,
very core, intuitive longing
that is present in everybody.
Now this is all part of kind
of the historical development
of the last thousands of years.
Like many, many,
many things in life,
awakening has been
somewhat co-opted
by the domination
of masculine energy.
OK.
So lots of things
in life have been
dominated by the masculine.
>>LISA: Historically.
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
I don't necessarily mean by men.
I mean by masculine energy.
>>LISA: Right.
>>ARDAGH: So, for example,
international relations
over the last
thousands of years has
been dominated by
masculine energy,
so we've had more
of a tendency to go
to war, which is a
masculine preoccupation,
than towards diplomacy.
Or business has been very much
dominated by the masculine.
So we had a very competitive,
testosterone-driven business
environment.
>>LISA: These are the
things I was thinking
of when we were
talking about the ego.
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, it's actually a lot
of those things are simply
attributes of
testosterone-driven behavior.
It's just a hormone.
And it's a good
hormone in many ways.
Spiritual awakening has
also been very much co-opted
by the masculine.
OK?
Which means that we
have made awakening
into the idea of a journey.
A journey on a path.
Now you're on this
path and you're
working toward this goal.
And that's basically how
the masculine psyche works.
The masculine psyche
likes to think of a goal--
>>LISA: Conquering.
>>ARDAGH: --and likes to
have difficult obstacles
to overcome.
The hero's journey.
You break through the
obstacles to get to the goal.
Right?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>ARDAGH: So that's what the
masculine does with everything.
So for thousands of
years, man or woman,
if you were interested
in awakening,
what was mostly available to
you was a hierarchical context--
very often with a teacher who
was reported to be enlightened,
which is a concept
we could question.
Then you would join
an organization,
follow very often a
holy book of dogma.
And this was what was available.
I mean, either you really
were just like a free agent
who winged it on their own-- but
that was a very difficult thing
to do-- or if you
wanted help, this
was the help that was available.
Very, very patriarchal,
structured help.
Well, even 30, 40 years ago,
this remained unquestioned.
If we go back to when you and
I were discovering this stuff,
that was the way it was.
People went to Maharishi Mahesh
Yogi with TM or to Rajneesh
or-- he's now Osho.
That was what was available.
You went to a male teacher
with an organization
and you would fit in
with what was going on.
My teacher, Poonja Ji,
did not operate that way.
He was more of a coach.
He didn't have an organization.
He didn't have a teaching.
And as quickly as possible,
he entered into a friendship
with people that was
non-hierarchical.
And that was really
what I grew up on.
That was what worked for me.
But once I got back
to America again,
initially he asked me to teach.
He said, OK, now
you know the secret.
Go and share the secret
with your friends.
So that's what happened.
But very quickly the
same thing occurred.
But now it was
ridiculous because I'd
been 20 years on
the receiving end
of this hierarchical
relationship,
now I found myself on
the other side of it,
that I was sitting
in a chair and people
would sit there
and like, namaste.
Oh, he looked at me.
Wow.
And I realized it's all made up.
A lot of it is projection.
>>LISA: What we're looking
for, yes, essentially.
>>ARDAGH: The whole
theater, you see,
the whole theater of a
teacher and students.
A tremendous amount
of projection happens.
So after a few years-- three,
four years of doing this-- I
went back to see him
again-- my teacher.
And I said to him, I don't
want to do this anymore.
I don't want to be
a teacher because it
feels to me a very artificial
kind of theater is created.
And it's not true.
This hierarchy is not true.
To say somebody's enlightened
and somebody's un-enlightened,
it's just not true.
If we were talking about
looking at the sky,
we wouldn't then
make a demarcation
and say, oh, this
is a sky see-er,
this is a non sky see-er.
It's just the sky.
>>LISA: Right.
>>ARDAGH: So seeing
the truth of things,
it doesn't make you a
different kind of human being,
it's something that's
available to everybody.
So I said to him, I just wasn't
comfortable with the theater
that was easily
created around it.
His response to me
was very interesting.
He said, do whatever you want.
Except, of course, he said,
(GRUFFLY) do whatever you want.
(NORMAL VOICE) But
you have a destiny,
and the destiny
eventually will win.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>ARDAGH: I didn't know
what he meant by that.
But I said, OK.
>>LISA: That was very
good advice, though.
>>ARDAGH: Well, I had
no idea what he meant.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>ARDAGH: So I went
back to America,
and now I had nothing
to do because I
had resigned as being a teacher.
Now, I used to teach in
a massage school called
"Alive and Well" in
San Anselmo, California
where I had previously
taught hypnotherapy.
And they said, would you like
to have your job back because we
need a hypnotherapy teacher.
I said, well, I'm not going
to teach hypnotherapy anymore,
but maybe I could
train people to do
what I've been
doing as a teacher.
I could train them how to
do this with each other.
They said, great,
let's try that out.
So that was the first awakening
coaching training in 1995.
It's almost 20 years now.
>>LISA: And that is-- so
you're living your destiny.
You're living out your destiny.
>>ARDAGH: But I didn't know
what it was then, you see?
>>LISA: Wow.
That's a beautiful
example though.
>>ARDAGH: Didn't
know what it was.
>>LISA: In Arjuna's
eighth book--
>>ARDAGH: Let me
say one more thing.
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
Yes.
>>ARDAGH: Because here's
the interesting thing.
I had been with Poonja Ji, I
had been with many teachers,
and I had seen this very
powerful transmission that
could happen where people
would experience awakening.
Now, when I had this
class of 30 people
and I started training them
to do this with each other,
here was the amazing thing--
the awakening was just as deep,
just as profound when
it was peer based,
and the results were
more stable because it
didn't have this projection.
The results were
actually more stable.
>>LISA: Can I ask you
about that transmission
that you're talking about?
Did you physically see a
transmission coming through
or did you see the manifestation
of it with the people?
>>ARDAGH: No.
I'm talking simply about what
happens when two people get
together and somebody,
who we're calling
the teacher or the facilitator,
guides somebody into awakening,
you could call that a
kind of transmission.
>>LISA: Well, that
word is used and thrown
around a lot here in the US.
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
>>LISA: About deeksha
and the transmission
from the oneness
and so forth and I
don't know a lot about it.
But could you tell me a
little bit about that?
No.
>>ARDAGH: Don't know about that.
>>LISA: But do you know that
transmission you're just
talking about as the experience.
It's not a thing.
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
>>LISA: OK.
Thanks for clearing that up.
Well, let's talk
a look at Arjuna
talking about his latest book
called, "Better Than Sex."
Take a look.
>>ARDAGH: Hi, this
is Arjuna Ardagh.
And I'm extremely delighted to
tell you about my latest book.
As you might know, I've
written eight books in my life.
And, honestly, most
of them, I write
them and I say
what I have to say
and I never look at them again.
And if I do, they don't
really engage me very much.
And I just finished a book now
which is the first time ever
in my life that
I've written a book
and it's my favorite reading.
So I was sitting on
a train in Austria
reading this book on my
iPad and laughing out loud.
And somebody said, ah, you
look like you're enjoying that
so much.
What are you reading?
I said, it's called,
"Better Than Sex."
They said, who wrote it?
I said, I did.
So this is my new book.
"Better Than Sex."
Here it is.
You can get it on
Kindle and iBooks
and you can get it on
Amazon as a physical book.
I love this book.
It's everything I've ever
wanted to say in 200 pages.
A little bit more.
The book is really a
beginner's introduction
to the work we do called
awakening coaching.
And I tell you the
story of everything
we have to say through
the analogy of a party.
So you're invited to a party.
I invite you into the book.
Quickly we establish
it's a potluck party.
So we find out what
you had to bring,
which is your longing,
your intention,
your passion in life.
And then I introduce you to
a lot of different people.
Some of them are coaches.
Some of them are people who
have benefited from coaching--
to find out really
exactly what is possible
when we take the longing
for awakening out
of the context of
hierarchical spirituality
with a guru or an avatar
or a saint or something,
into the context of peer
support, which is really
what coaching is all about.
So in the book we
talk about what
is awakening, what is
coaching, and why is there
this revolution in coaching,
which, in my opinion,
is really an important symptom
of the evolution of humanity
at this time.
What happens when we bring
awakening and coaching
together?
We go through the seven-- the
seven-- innate brilliances
which makes someone an
incredibly great awakening
coach.
These are qualities that can
be learned and duplicated.
They're not something
you have to be born with.
We talk about what's
it like to be coached.
What kind of issues does this
kind of coaching address?
What do you need
to become a coach?
And I also do my best to
answer all of the questions
that people ask me repeatedly
in evening presentations
and workshops and conferences.
I hope you're going
to love this book.
I would like to say it's funny
as well as being explanatory.
And we wanted to
really offer you
a kind of a present--
two presents.
First of all, when
you get this book,
it automatically
gives you access
to a members website,
which has video,
audio, additional readings,
which really fleshes it out.
So everything we talk
about in the book
you can watch on video.
You can watch demonstrations
of awakening on video.
And whatever you
pay for the book,
if you buy it as an
e-book it's $9.99.
If you buy it on Amazon as
a physical book, it's $15.
Whatever you pay,
keep your receipt,
we give you a complete
credit for whatever
you paid for whatever you
want to do with us next,
whether it's being
coached, becoming a coach,
taking an online course.
So, essentially, if you take
any next step, the book is free.
I hope you will really
jump in and buy this book.
I'd like you to because
I love it so much,
and I hope you'll
enjoy reading it
as much as I enjoy reading
it on my Vienna train rides.
See you soon.
This is Arjuna Ardagh.
>>LISA: So in the book you talk
about the style of coaching--
the awakening coaching--
being very different
for men and women.
>>ARDAGH: Mm-hm.
>>LISA: Why is that?
>>ARDAGH: Well, the
aspects of coaching
are different for men and women.
When we have a
moment of awakening,
which is also always
somehow a moment--
>>LISA: And you
can have several.
>>ARDAGH: Oh, yeah.
Exactly.
You can have now
and now and now.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>ARDAGH: So whenever there's
a moment of awakening,
what is recognized is
infinite, is formless.
It's the source of everything,
but it has no substance.
So that, of course, is
neither male nor female,
masculine or feminine;
it's just emptiness.
But as soon as that begins to
be expressed through a body,
it's going to be
expressed through
the particular
attributes of our body.
So an (INDIAN ACCENT)
Indian awakening
will be (TEXAN ACCENT) damn
different than Texan awakening
and (FRENCH ACCENT)
very different
indeed from French awakening.
(NORMAL VOICE) So, of
course, every human being
is going to express
their original nature
in the same way; it's
the same original nature.
>>LISA: Through their filters.
>>ARDAGH: Well, not just
through conditioning.
It's the same original
nature, but there's
like you could say there's a
unique flavor to each human
being.
I'm sure you saw that when
your daughter was little.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
>>ARDAGH: And she
was at kindergarten.
I mean, kindergarten-age
children are not very
conditioned yet, but they
have a unique flavor,
a unique natural character
they bring into the world.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>ARDAGH: Well, so we understand
that, that your original nature
is going to express differently
through different physical
form.
Well, the most fundamental
difference between people,
the first thing you notice about
anybody before anything else,
is their gender.
If I was to say to
you, oh, Lisa have you
changed your hair
color a little bit?
That would be understandable.
If I said, well, I
thought I remembered
you being a bit taller.
That be understandable.
If I said, oh, Lisa, I thought
I remembered you had glasses.
That would be understandable.
If I said, oh, Lisa,
nice to see you.
Funny, I thought you were a man.
That would be
completely weird, right?
Nobody ever mistakes
somebody's gender.
>>LISA: This is true.
>>ARDAGH: Other things
you can get mixed up.
You could say to me, I didn't
remember you had a beard.
I would get that.
But if you said,
Arjuna, I thought
you were a woman,
that would-- I would--
So gender is the most
fundamental thing.
>>LISA: I don't know, you
could be pretty transgender.
You're pretty neutral.
>>ARDAGH: Let's not go there.
Anyway.
>>LISA: You're gender neutral.
>>ARDAGH: So gender is the
most fundamental distinction
we make.
Yet, despite the fact that
that's the most fundamental
distinction, we have actually
made very little distinction
historically between
what works for men
and what works for women
in terms of embodiment.
So if we're talking about
the tools that give you
the taste of awakening,
that's pretty much the same.
If we're talking
about the tools that
allow you to embody awakening,
that's very, very different
because embodiment
involves the balance
of the body and the
hormones that run
in a male and female body
are completely different.
>>LISA: You don't think that
that causes separateness?
>>ARDAGH: Well, it's-- that
separateness has a beauty
to it.
I mean, attraction and
sexuality and falling in love
and all sort of things are a
function of that separateness.
I mean, not all
separateness is bad.
>>LISA: That's a great answer.
>>ARDAGH: There's
good separateness.
And that's actually a
little bit of the point.
That if we practice-- if we
use practices that are just
sort of calming, neutralizing
practices like, you know,
namaste, we are one.
I mean, that's great
for staying really calm,
but there's actually by
now a considerable body
of scientific evidence
that demonstrates
that if you do this too
much, your genitals actually
wither and drop off.
>>LISA: There is not.
>>ARDAGH: Yeah,
Scientific American.
>>LISA: There is?
There is not!
>>ARDAGH: Anyway, the thing is--
the thing is-- as you can see,
we don't want to get
too serious about this.
Anyway, the point is, you
see, that if you actually
want to live a passionate
life, which is not just
about sex and intimacy, but
it's about giving your gift
to the world.
If you want to be alive and
really live fully and not
just live in this kind of
trance of we're all one.
But if you want to really
participate in the world
and raise your children
beautifully and create
an incredible relationship
and do a great TV show and all
this stuff, if you
want to do all that,
then we don't just need
practices that dull you out
and make you really sort of--
You want practices that allow
you to live your passion.
Those practices are
different for men and women
because the way that we live
our energy is different.
Men, or masculine
energy, anyway,
tends to be more focused,
more goal oriented, more
to do with breaking through
barriers and going for a goal.
This is because of
testosterone, you see.
Women, on the other hand,
when they-- so, for a man--
now, this is
controversial stuff.
>>LISA: Very.
Because I find myself
that way a lot.
I'm goal oriented,
and I'm task oriented.
>>ARDAGH: We all
have both energies.
But it is useful to understand
that there are these two
energies.
I mean, these-- talking about
yin and yang, shiva and shakti,
masculine and feminine,
I mean, it's very,
very commonly understood.
>>LISA: It exists.
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
It exists.
Right?
So here's the thing--
we all have both.
Of course, I have feminine
energy and masculine.
You have masculine energy
as well as feminine, right?
But it's really great
to be able to understand
that there are these energies
and certain practices will
increase one and
certain practices
will increase another.
>>LISA: You got it.
Yes.
>>ARDAGH: And all
that's important is
that you have the freedom
to express yourself
without limitation.
Now, let me give you, if I may,
the most obvious example where
this is useful.
>>LISA: OK.
>>ARDAGH: I've met women who
followed very masculine paths.
Now, one of my books came
out about 10 years ago,
it was called, "The
Translucent Revolution."
In that book there's a
story of Sherry Anderson,
who was a Zen monk--
a Zen abbot actually--
in Nova Scotia in Canada.
It was freezing cold.
She had actually a
Vietnamese Zen master.
Not quite sure how that
works with Vietnam and Japan.
Anyway, it was a
Vietnamese master.
And she was getting up at 4:00
AM to do Zazen meditation.
She was totally depressed.
She had a shaved head.
She felt like-- she
just felt lifeless.
And so she contacted
her teacher and said,
this is not working for me.
I feel totally depressed.
He said, get up
one hour earlier.
She was following Zazen, happens
to be a hyper masculine path.
It's perfectly good;
it's just very masculine.
So finally she got so
fed up, she gave up
her monk hood, abandoned her
robes, and she moved to Sedona,
Arizona, which happens to
be quite a feminine place,
grew her hair again
and started to dance.
She decided to do Sufi dancing.
She says within six
months she could
feel god flowing through
every cell of her body.
And then she went on
to write a book called,
"The Feminine Face of God."
And she developed a
whole thing around
feminine spiritual practice.
Now, she's a really
poignant example of somebody
who was simply practicing an
inappropriate thing for her.
That practice of Zazen would
be great for somebody else.
It'd be great for me.
I've got a very
masculine energy.
But for somebody with
a very feminine heart,
it was crippling her.
Now, I've seen-- in the course
of the time I've been teaching
this, I've seen so many women
who, in their innocence,
were really longing to know the
divine, to know that deep love,
but they were following a hyper
masculine approach, you see.
Now, it's all good,
and sometimes it
could be good for a woman to
use hyper masculine techniques
or masculine techniques, and
it's good for a man to dance.
But it's important
to understand there
are these different practices,
they have different effects,
and to use the right
practice at the right time
for the right person.
>>LISA: Very well said.
Yes, I've seen many
women in Hollywood
where there is a lot of
pre-defined positions
that had to do
with the male race.
And women that then get into
these executive positions
become very hard
and masculine when
they are in those
positions to compete.
And I've seen them
literally get sick
because they lose so
much of their femininity
and their female hormones.
>>ARDAGH: Well,
here's the good news.
I'm not by any means suggesting
that women should not
be in positions of
responsibility or power.
>>LISA: Me neither.
>>ARDAGH: I'm not
saying that at all.
>>LISA: There's a
different way of doing it.
>>ARDAGH: It's not even that.
Here's the good news.
You only need a tiny bit
of conscious practice
to balance hours of
other activities.
>>LISA: Good news.
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
So this is the way that I
work with women clients who
come to me for coaching.
I've worked with
a woman who was--
I can't say which city
because it would be, you know,
but she was in a
big city in the US.
She was the coordinator
of all the judges.
So there were all
the judges, all men,
and she was the one
who had to keep them
all in tune with each other.
Well, she tried to do that by
exuding very masculine energy.
Well, of course, faced with
all these men being judges,
she never could do
the masculine thing
quite as well as they did.
So I said to her,
look, all you need
is a little bit of
feminine practice
to balance out all the day.
And I've done this
with executives,
with police, with
all kinds of things.
All you need--
this is a takeaway
from this conversation.
This is all that a
woman needs to do
who's in an executive position.
When she comes home
in the evening,
takes everything
off-- the jewelry,
everything-- has a shower
to wash it all away.
And then, funnily enough,
after the shower--
it may be overdoing it a bit
with the water-- you-- then you
have a bath, all righ,
with oils and everything.
Soak in a bath, right,
with maybe some candles.
Come out of the bath,
put nice-- and then
you massage nice
creams into the body.
This is all bringing up
oxytocin in the body.
Put on completely
different clothing,
like flowing silk clothing.
Light candles, some nice music,
Sarah McLaughlin or something.
An hour of that will completely
neutralize an entire day
of working in the most
masculine environment.
>>LISA: So then how do you
get back into the masculine?
>>ARDAGH: You don't have
to worry about that.
>>LISA: Yeah.
That definitely happens.
That's beautiful.
>>ARDAGH: But the same
thing for a man, you see.
You might have a
man who has been
in a very kind of
chaotic environment
where there's a lot of
things flying at him.
Like for me for many years
I was raising my kids alone
between marriages.
I had a period where
I was a single dad,
and, you know, I was doing
the shopping, the cleaning,
and cooking.
And men, generally
speaking-- this
ought to do with gender
difference-- because
of hormones, men are
not nearly as good
at multitasking as women are.
So men get much
more-- so for a man,
you only need to sit or
do chikun or something
for a few minutes of centering
and it brings you back.
And you don't have
to do it all day.
That's the point about practice.
You practice meditation
or dance or yoga,
you don't have to
do it all the time.
A little bit is enough to
bring you back to balance.
>>LISA: Can recenter.
Well, regardless of gender,
everyone has a deep longing.
And this next clip here is
about discovering your deepest
longing.
Take a look.
>>ARDAGH: What is
your deepest longing?
I've asked that question or
facilitated that question being
asked in groups with
thousands and thousands
and thousands of people.
And I've come to
a few observations
that I want to share with
you about that question.
The first observation is
it's not just the question
but the space from which
the question is asked
makes all the difference.
So I'm going to do a really
quick demonstration of this
with Vicki.
I just volunteered Vicki.
So here's one way
to ask the question.
Something like this.
Hey, Vicki, you're from?
>>AUDIENCE: Ventura.
>>ARDAGH: Ventura.
Very nice.
I've been to Ventura.
There's some cool people
living in Ventura.
Now, tell me Vicki,
I'm curious to know.
What is your deepest longing?
>>AUDIENCE: You want the answer?
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
Tell me your deepest
longing, Vicki.
>>AUDIENCE: Grace and ease.
>>ARDAGH: Grace and ease.
Fantastic.
Isn't there a TV show
called grace and ease.
No, maybe that's
"Will and Grace."
Great answer, Vicki.
Wonderful.
Give a round of applause to
Vicki for grace and ease.
Now, wait, wait, wait, tell me
your deepest longing, Vicki.
Go ahead.
>>AUDIENCE: Are
we starting again?
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
Just tell me your deepest
longing, would you?
>>AUDIENCE: Grace and ease.
>>ARDAGH: Grace and ease.
Let me just see if
there's an app for that.
Let's see, Grace-- OK.
So that's one way to
ask the question, right,
which obviously I exaggerated
it for dramatic purposes.
But to ask it in a
kind of high energy
but slightly distracted state.
Now let me ask you again.
OK?
Hey, Vicki, what's
your deepest longing?
>>AUDIENCE: The same.
Grace and ease.
>>ARDAGH: Mm-hm.
And what's even deeper?
What's your deepest longing?
>>AUDIENCE: Um, peace.
>>ARDAGH: Peace.
So quick contrast.
The answers you're going
to get to that question
vary tremendously on
the degree of presence
which we bring as a coach.
We could obviously elaborate
a lot more on that,
but I've got 15 minutes
and the clock's whirring,
so let me tell you the
second observation.
When we work with this question,
asking people to go deeper,
I've noticed that
longing works in layers.
And very often the
first answer people
give you may not actually
be their deepest answer.
Not that it's the wrong answer.
It might be-- in fact, it might
even be the correct answer,
but it's more like the
words and the feeling of it.
Do you know the
difference with that?
Somebody could
say-- you could ask,
what's your deepest longing?
Oneness with all things.
But it's somehow you can
feel that they're just
quoting Eckhart Tolle
rather than really
feeling the longing itself.
Longing goes in layers.
And what I've noticed is if
you can help someone as a coach
to shift from one layer
of longing to another,
the deeper layer will actually
nourish the initial layer.
You see what I mean?
So here's an example.
We might start with, what's
your deepest longing?
To have a $2 million a
year income, a great house,
and a Ferrari.
OK.
What's your deepest longing?
To make a difference.
To serve people.
To contribute.
Now, you probably
know-- I'm sure you
know as coaches, if
you can serve someone
to make a contribution,
it's probably
going to give them a
comfortable lifestyle.
Going after the lifestyle
is not necessarily
going to give them
a sense of service.
You see the point?
>>LISA: So I love
how you bring what
you talk about into
practical terms
because ultimately you're
residing in the US now
and you are-- part
of your destiny
is to bring these teachings
from your vast experiences
to a practical level.
And even though the Gaiam
audience is international,
it appeals to every
single person.
Now you recently did
a talk at Google.
And why did they
bring you in there--
I was just curious-- to a group
of software engineers, yes?
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
Well, Google is a great
company like that.
Google is, I think,
the pioneer, globally,
at really making an attempt
to fundamentally transform
corporate culture.
Because it's-- By now it's a
warn out idiom that people say
thank God it's Friday.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>ARDAGH: It's kind of
commonly understood maxim
that people don't
like going to work.
But it's completely illogical.
I mean, since you spend
most of your time there,
it would really make
sense that we look forward
to going to work.
Because I do.
I don't ever leave work
because I enjoy it so much.
So Google is really
pioneering what's
it going to take to create
a corporate culture that
gets the job done
but that actually
gets people inspired
and passionate.
And it's a work in
progress, of course.
>>LISA: It's great.
>>ARDAGH: So they've
installed meditation rooms.
They've got a slide instead of
stairs in one of the buildings.
They've done everything they
can to make it more fun.
But, of course,
what's really required
is not just external
change but to really help
people to shift
their consciousness.
So they invite all
sorts of experts
in who have something to offer.
They have a program
called Google Pause.
So I was speaking in that vein.
And I was very, very
grateful for the reception.
People were very,
very open there.
>>LISA: Well, you were
talking about inspiring
your creative genius, yeah?
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, that's the thing,
you see, that awakening--
when we talk about
awakening, it has really
being fostered in
oriental cultures, which
tend to be more
inward and reclusive.
So it's hot there-- India,
especially the south of India,
it's very hot.
Too hot to do very much.
>>LISA: Yes.
Very still.
>>ARDAGH: You have to spend
a lot of time keeping still.
But we don't live
in such a hot place,
so we're not quite so reclusive.
And for you and me
and everybody we know,
our lives are about
creating stuff.
So we have children
and we have a house,
make the house beautiful,
and then you do what you can
for the environment
and for transforming
the economy and politics.
Your life is about contribution.
So when-- I think
probably it would
be true for most of the
people listening to this,
just getting into a kind of
empty state and staying there,
that doesn't really
feel like a good use
of a life for most people.
We want to actually
manifest that.
So the good news
is that when you
tune into this infinite
consciousness, in one sense
it's empty.
From the perspective of
color and shape and movement
and sound, it is empty.
But in another way, it is
full of pure potentiality.
It is the source of all love.
Where does love come from?
You know, when we sit and
meet-- when friends sit and meet
and we look into each other's
eyes, we go, ah, yeah.
It's here.
Where does that
feeling come from?
It's not biological.
There's nothing in the
cells that can do that.
It's something-- it's that
infinite consciousness.
It is love itself,
but it is also
the source of every new idea.
Where do ideas come from?
You can regurgitate
things you've heard.
If you go to school and
you learn this thing,
you can repeat it for the exam.
That's coming from conditioning.
But if you read
something in a book
and reorganize it
and then come forth
with an original, new
idea, that does not
come from conditioning,
that comes from--
>>LISA: Inspiration.
>>ARDAGH: That comes from--
yeah, like the-- the dark hole,
you could say the black hole out
of which everything manifests.
If you've seen this new movie
about the life of Stephen
Hawking where he's-- it's
a very beautiful movie.
It's called "The
Theory of Everything."
>>LISA: Oh, wonderful.
>>ARDAGH: And he's talking
in that movie about how
black holes are
incredibly compressed,
but they actually are the source
out of which everything arises,
you see, so that infinite space
which is formless, timeless,
which has no content, it's
out of that unmanifest source
that everything arises.
So we were talking earlier.
Every example of true
genius-- true genius
is not the capacity to
regurgitate what you've heard;
true genius is the capacity
to be a vehicle for something
to pass through you-- not
from you-- from a source that
is unknown.
So it's well known
that Albert Einstein,
he came up with a theory of
relativity in the bathtub.
He wasn't sitting, trying.
He was spacious.
Good friend of
ours, Jack Canfield
who has sold more
books in his field
than in history, where did
he come up with the title
"Chicken Soup for the Soul?"
He was meditating.
He was spacious.
And he saw this hand, "Chicken
Soup," and he had a thought,
I'm not going to call
my book "Chicken Soup."
And the hand went
on, "for the Soul."
He went, oh.
It came to him.
Steve Jobs, we were talking
about Steve Jobs earlier, well,
most people know now Steve Jobs,
he started out experimenting
with all kinds of consciousness
changing methodologies.
And that opened his space
enough to bring forth
a whole revolution in the way
that we think about computers.
So every genius, everyone
who brings something
fresh that's never
been there before,
they have access
to the infinite.
And this is where
awakening-- it's
not just about escaping
the world at all--
it's about being connected to
the source in which brilliance
arises.
>>LISA: Beautiful.
Beautiful.
Let's take a look at
Arjuna's talk at Google.
Take a look.
>>ARDAGH: And that's really
been the question that
has governed my
entire adult life.
From being a student at
Cambridge University,
that was really what fascinated
me more than anything else.
What is it that allows
us-- Well, first
of all, what is
it that allows us
to live incredibly
fulfilled lives?
What is the key that allows
some people under almost
any circumstance to be
living a life of no regret?
To be living a life where
you are impassioned,
where you're on fire, where
you feel grateful easily.
And what is it that allows many
other people to be suffering,
not always for physical reasons,
but especially in our culture
people suffer more for
psychological reasons,
for attitudinal
reasons more than
because they don't
have enough food
or water or physical things.
Initially in this
investigation, I
thought that
ultimate fulfillment
was to do with spirituality
because a lot of the most
fulfilled people in our
culture have been mystics,
have been people who have
created spiritual traditions
or religions.
But actually, when
we investigate it
in an objective way,
it's not always true.
You can make your life
about spirituality,
you can make your
life about meditation;
it doesn't necessarily in a
reliable way to fulfillment.
So what else could it be?
Then I considered
maybe it's love.
Maybe it's having
perfect relationships,
having the right spouse
and the right 2.35 children
and the right suburb
of the right city.
Maybe that's the
key to fulfillment.
We don't have so long to go
into all the possibilities--
and there are many
possible answers--
but what seems to hit
the nail every time
is to drop into the
frequency of genius.
When we fall into-- as
Rachel was speaking,
when we fall into a
flow where you know
you're doing the
right thing, you
know you're creating
the right thing,
you know that you're
contributing exactly what you
were born to contribute,
to contribute to all of us
moving forwards,
that, I would say,
whenever someone falls
into that frequency,
it's a reliable key to
a life of no regret--
to a life of
complete fulfillment.
>>LISA: The question
that's arising
from me is we talked at
the beginning of the show
about the ego, and the
ego being a behavior.
But it's not a tangible,
physical thing.
What is the difference between
the ego and love that is also
non-tangible, it is a behavior.
What's the difference?
>>ARDAGH: Right.
OK.
So the difference has to do
with the source of the energy.
So what I'm going to say
now is incredibly black
and white and oversimplistic.
But one dimension of you
and me and everybody we know
is conditioning,
which is the way
that a computer is programmed.
If you program a computer in
a certain way, it stores code.
And then if you
click this button,
you can be absolutely sure
what the result will be.
If you click the button that
says Print, lo and behold,
the printer starts printing.
Now it's not that
sometimes you hit Print
and the shower comes on.
And sometimes you hit Print
and the sprinkler system
goes on in the garden.
You hit Print, every single
time you get the same result.
That's conditioned.
It's programmed, right.
Now, there's a lot of
things about human beings
that are conditioned,
and there's
nothing wrong with that.
It's perfectly good.
When I walk over to
the door, I don't
have to learn again how
to use a door handle.
It's conditioned in me.
I reach out.
I don't have to think.
Same thing with a car.
I don't have to
learn how to drive
the car every time I get in.
I know how to operate the
clutch and all that, right?
So that's one level of you
and me and everybody we know
is condition.
In that way we're robotic.
We're actually--
we're pretty much
like conditioned computers.
But there is another dimension
to you and me and everybody
we know which you
don't have to go
through a long journey
of completely getting
rid of the first one to
get to the second one.
It's there all the time,
which is spontaneous.
It's hard to find the words.
And it's good that it's
hard to find the right words
because we're talking
about a realm that is not
within the realm-- it's
not within the prison
of conditioned language.
It's free.
But-- so let's call it like
this, like an eruption,
like a spurting out of nothing.
It's like quantum physics,
you see, there's nothing.
And out of absolutely
nothing arises something.
This is the Heisenberg's
Uncertainty Principle,
there's a wave and then the
wave just becomes a particle
through observation that
was not there before.
So when you-- you've
got a beautiful husband
and a beautiful daughter.
When you're together
with your family--
and I've seen you with your
family-- you look at them
and then I'm sure
you've seen this.
And you might just
suddenly say something.
You might look at your
daughter and look at her
and then she'll speak
something, and you
don't know what
she's going to say
and it's completely spontaneous.
And that's actually
mostly what humor is.
You see, when we
enjoy humor together,
it's usually we laugh when
somebody says something
that was completely
unpredictable.
You could never have guessed
what they were going to say.
Unless it's like a
rehearsed joke or something.
But if we're just-- sorry,
didn't mean to interrupt you.
But if we're just
fooling around together,
that's why we laugh, because
somebody says something
you could not have predicted.
So all the time these two
dimensions are going on.
Well, actually there's
three dimensions.
There's also the physical body
that has its own conditioning.
But that's more
biological conditioning,
that's not social conditioning.
So you've got the
body that wants
to pee when it wants
to pee and wants to eat
and wants to sleep,
and then you've
got this conditioned
thoughts, and then
deeper than that there is the
eruption of pure spontaneity.
And all three co-exist, you see.
>>LISA: And so it could erupt
as ego, it could erupt as love?
>>ARDAGH: No, no, no.
What you're calling ego
is a way of describing
this conditioned behavior.
>>LISA: Oh, got it.
>>ARDAGH: Which is conditioned
towards being small, being
separate.
Because it feels
small and separate,
so it gets manipulative,
it gets competitive,
it's willing to tell lies.
It does all this stuff.
But it's understandable because
it has defined itself as me.
You see?
It said, I'm a me.
It's all based on
the idea of me,
which you also can't find that.
You can't find the ego.
You can't find the I or the me.
You can talk about it.
You can't actually
directly experience it.
Nobody ever has.
>>LISA: Right.
>>ARDAGH: So this idea
of me as separate,
as soon as you think
of yourself as me,
separate, now everybody
else is a threat.
So I've got to cheat a little
bit and lie a little bit,
manipulate a little bit.
All of that behavior--
it's not wrong--
it's completely the
inevitable byproduct
of thinking of yourself
as small and separate.
Then you have to
behave that way.
Right?
But the other dimension of
you, which is always here,
which is infinite,
which is spacious,
which needs nothing
from everybody,
which has everything
to give to everybody,
it doesn't need to
manipulate or lie at all.
It's free.
And we don't-- this
is the big catch,
you don't have to get rid of one
in order to access the other.
You can accept that
they all coexist.
And the more you
relax, actually,
into recognizing
the spaciousness,
the more you can be
humorous about little quirks
of the conditioning
and laugh about it.
I mean, I'm nearly 60 and,
you know, I'm British.
And I do British things.
I say things in a British way.
If somebody bangs
into me, I say, sorry.
Oh, sorry.
It's just British
conditioning, you see?
Well, you can laugh about that.
My kids, you know,
they-- we were in-- we
were together in
TLC this summer.
And our mutual friend, Chris
Atwood, he asked my son,
Abby, he said, well, so how
was it being raised by Arjuna?
I guess they were curious.
What kind of dad
would Arjuna be?
How was it being
raised by Arjuna?
My son looked up for a
minute and he said, well,
it was basically a series
of awkward moments.
>>LISA: That's a great answer.
>>ARDAGH: So, you see, we
have our personalities,
but the more you can rest in
this undefined spaciousness,
the more you just laugh
about the idiosyncrasies
of the conditioning, you
don't have to make it go away.
It's all just
happily coexisting.
>>LISA: Which is why there
is a result of laughter
from awakening coaching,
which you explain,
which is wonderful.
>>ARDAGH: Totally.
Totally.
>>LISA: I've so enjoyed--
>>ARDAGH: Oh, is it finished?
>>LISA: I know.
I want to keep going.
>>ARDAGH: Oh, I
want another one.
>>LISA: We'll have to
do this again sometime.
>>ARDAGH: Totally.
>>LISA: I love
your-- I could listen
to your stories and your
philosophies all day.
It's wonderful.
>>ARDAGH: Aw.
I want another ride.
>>LISA: OK.
It's fun.
The journeys and your
storytelling is beautiful.
>>ARDAGH: Well, you know, you're
the best interviewer ever,
don't you?
>>LISA: I am emerged here.
I love it.
I love this.
Thank you so much.
>>ARDAGH: All right.
Well, thank you.
Thank you.
>>LISA: And if you would like to
watch a replay of my interview
with Arjuna Ardagh, you can
go to gaiamtv.com and share it
with your friends.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]